Markets are going to watch what the Fed
does in terms of its next decision. But
that's a that's just one decision on
interest rates. You know, I think what
it does with its balance sheet is
equally important.
>> Welcome to another episode of WSJ's Take
on the Week. I'm Telus Deemos
>> and I'm Hannah Erin Lang.
>> Well, we've got a cool show for everyone
today. We're going to talk about the
Federal Reserve's upcoming meeting this
week, but not quite in the usual way.
We're also going to check in on stuff
going on in the rest of the world.
Japanese markets. Pretty interesting
stuff there. And also, of course, the AI
trade and what's going on in the US
stocks. Hannah, you watch the markets so
closely. We had a big down week, a big
up week, and then like a kind of a
sideways week. So, where are we with
this?
>> Yeah, absolutely. I think we've seen
optimism reemerge among investors since
that tech selloff we saw right before
Thanksgiving.
>> We're kind of back in all-time high
territory in the S&P 500, right?
>> Yeah. Yeah. We're not too far off an
all-time high for the S&P 500. Crypto
prices are recovering. investors are
feeling pretty good about that meeting
coming up at the Federal Reserve. Um,
and the AI bubble fear seemed to have
pretty much dissipated, at least for the
time being. It seems like a big factor
in that was when Nvidia reported
earnings a couple of weeks ago that
really calmed the markets. You know, the
AI giant leader, one of the biggest
stocks in the market. They gave very
optimistic forecasts for their business.
And we're going to get a couple more
earnings reports this upcoming week that
I think I don't know. I think it could
go either way in calming the fears
further or maybe reigniting some of the
worries because we've got a couple of
interesting companies in the AI space.
We've got Oracle which has been doing a
lot of buildout of infrastructure and
they've been borrowing a ton of money.
They've got a big deal with open AI for
future computing. And I think Oracle has
really kind of uh uh centered the the
market's concerns, interest, questions
about whether all this borrowing that
companies are doing to build data
centers and other AI infrastructure by
chips and things is going to work out.
Uh Oracle, interestingly, what an
investor would pay to protect against a
default for Oracle, a credit default
swap for those who remember that market.
Uh people have been watching the prices
of Oracle's credit default swaps, which
is a pretty weird thing to say about a
tech company. I mean, tech companies
have had sterling credit over the last
few years, but with everybody kind of
having to to tap the debt markets in
various ways to pay for these this
massive, you know, multi- trillion
dollar wave of investment, I think
Oracle's results will actually be pretty
interesting.
>> Yeah. And Adobe, which is kind of an AI
lagard, right?
>> Adobe, everybody knows them for their
business with, you know, images, right?
They help you create images. is uh
they've got a ton of other software
businesses and you know they're they're
they're putting a lot of money into AI.
They've got a lot of AI tools integrated
into what they do. But I think that's a
company that really symbolizes this
question of who will ultimately win and
lose from an AI revolution, right? Will
a company that has sold a lot of
software to help people and that's not
just Adobe. There's all kinds of
companies that you know help help
businesses and individuals accomplish
tasks. Are those things going to get
better, more efficient? Are they going
to have great AI infused products or is
some of that going to be left behind
when people start using AI? They're not
going to need that sort of stuff anymore
or will a new company that's built, you
know, purpose-built around AI sort of
emerge to displace them. So, you know,
Adobe and a bunch of other software
companies have actually seen declines in
their stocks this year, even while the
rest of the AI sort of complex, and
that's a lot of the infrastructure
companies, chip companies, um, power
companies that that that will supply the
electricity. Those have all continued to
rise, and that's why I think Adobe's
earnings will actually be pretty
interesting.
>> Yeah, we've seen this really clear set
of AI winners emerge this year. and
Adobe may not be among them, but the AI
trade has been so make or break for the
stock market and increasingly for the
entire US economy. One question I'm
hearing a lot from investors is when and
how and to whom the AI trade will
broaden to um beyond the winners that
we've seen emerge in just this buildout
phase. And I think it's clearly a key
theme for 2026.
>> Yeah, I think that's a great question
for 2026, whether the AI trade moves on
to another sector. you know, will it be
banks, retailers, you know, could they
be transformed and improved by
artificial intelligence? Or maybe some
of them will be challenged by that too.
And speaking of 2026 audience, we are
still interested in your ideas for what
we should be talking about, what the key
themes are in 2026. We want your
feedback. Please send us an email take
on the weekwsj.com.
Drop a note in the comments of your
venue of choice and we'll talk about
those on an upcoming episode where we
really start to get into what might
drive the conversation in 2026. Not just
take on your week, but take on your
entire year. In the meantime, though,
more prosaically, we've got some big
moves in other markets that people have
been watching closely like the US
dollar. Hannah, what's going on in the
dollar?
>> Yeah. Um, the not so almighty dollar
this past week. Um, it's been the
greenback's longest losing streak since
2020. We're seeing, you know, interest
rate dynamics play a big role in this.
Um, and you know, a weak dollar is a big
concern for investors who continue to
bet the farm on US stocks and the S&P
500.
>> We've talked a lot on this show about
how US investors have been thinking
about moving money abroad, investing in
markets in other countries to protect
themselves from potential weakness in
the dollar and to take advantage of what
might be underpriced currencies in other
markets. And one market that's really
been in focus lately has been Japan.
There have been central bankers in Japan
who've made hawkish noises about raising
interest rates in Japan. Meanwhile, of
course, we know that the Federal Reserve
is or we'll get into this shortly. The
Federal Reserve here in the US is
expected to be cutting at least in the
near future. And what that means is that
the yield on Japanese bonds is going to
go up and the yield on US bonds might
not. That kind of draws money towards
Japan. And so the question is whether or
not that will continue to drive more
investors to, you know, shift a bit of
their money over to that market and take
them away from the US potentially.
>> So the BOJ is going to make its decision
later this month, but we've got a
central bank a little closer to home.
The Federal Reserve has its meeting this
upcoming week and investors expectations
about this meeting whether or not policy
makers will cut rates has actually
shifted pretty drastically over the last
month or so. We had, I think, less than
50% chance of a cut based on interest
rate future prices a month ago. Last
time I checked, we're now at 90%. So,
the vast majority of traders are
expecting an interest rate cut at the
meeting this week. And of course, this
comes as we've seen data suggesting
there are maybe cracks in the labor
market. That's something, of course,
that central bankers will want to
address. Um, and maybe some questions
about the health of the consumer as
well. But of course, if the Fed opts to
cut rates, that will provide a boost to
stocks.
>> Well, and I think another thing that
stock investors in particular will be
looking for will not be what the Fed
says about rates. What might really be
on people's minds and what they might
really be listening for are comments
about another decision that the Fed has
to make, which is what to do with its
balance sheet. The Federal Reserve's
balance sheet is a slightly mysterious
thing in some ways, but basically there
are assets and liabilities, sort of
money, reserves, currency slloshing
around in the United States. And for
many years, of course, the Federal
Reserve was expanding its balance sheet.
Then the Federal Reserve shifted gears,
started shrinking its balance sheet,
quantitative tightening. Well, as that
process kind of comes to an end here,
we've started to see things that, you
know, may not have made like front page
news, but were kind of concerning to
investors, you know, little moments
where, oh, okay, is there quite enough
money slloshing around in the system.
That's been a factor in the markets. Uh,
the chief equity strategist at Wells
Fargo, Osang Kuan, actually says that
liquidity in the Fed's balance sheet is
a key factor for tech stocks in
particular historically. So, we want to
know what the Fed says about its balance
sheet and what it might do. Could it
look to actually inject a little more
money into the economy after this long
period of shrinking the size of its
balance sheet? To answer that question,
we had a really interesting conversation
this past week with Nate Worfl. He is
the head of market structure and product
head for the global collateral platform
at BNY. He also worked at the New York
Fed. So, he is somebody who definitely
understands these complicated plumbing
issues and did a really good job of
translating them into why investors
should really be listening for what the
Fed has to say about it at their
upcoming meeting. And we're going to
have that conversation after the break.
Welcome back. We're here with Nate
Worfl. He is the head of market
structure and product head for the
global collateral platform at BNY. BNY,
of course, being the global systemically
important bank. uh and very central to
how treasuries trade uh and so therefore
pretty connected to what's going on with
the Federal Reserve and monetary policy
and all that. And Nate, we know the
Federal Reserve has some decisions
coming up. The one that we're all keyed
in on, of course, is what are they going
to do about interest rates? They going
to cut, are they going to hold? But
there are other decisions that are also
really important about the Fed's balance
sheet. Tell us tell us what people mean
when they say balance sheet and why we
should be paying attention to that.
>> Sure. Yeah, I mean the Fed does have
it's sort of at this pivot point now
where it's got important decisions to
make about interest rates um whether to
lower them or not, but it also has the
decision it needs to make around its
balance sheet. So, it's been reducing
the size of its balance sheet for the
last couple years and that was on the
back of all the assets it purchased
really following the COVID pandemic
where it bought a ton of Treasury
securities and agency MBS to really
restore market functioning and lower
long-term interest rates. So going from
what they call quantitative easing to
quantitative tightening. And so the
question is when will that tightening
end?
>> Yeah. And they've they've communicated
that they'll end it actually well we're
recording it today, December 1st.
>> Um that it should end on December 1st.
Um and and after that point really
there's a question about what will the
Fed do next? Will it continue to
maintain the size of the balance sheet
or might it need to actually start to
gradually grow the size of the balance
sheet in order to provide enough
liquidity to the banking system?
>> And what's at stake in those decisions?
Like how do most of us feel the impacts
of the Fed growing or shrinking its
balance sheet?
>> The Fed describes this as as operating
in an ample reserves framework. And what
does that mean? It basically means that
there's enough liquidity within the
banking system to support everyday
borrowing and lending and trading and
intermediation where you don't have to
worry about the cost of borrowing cash
on an overnight basis because it's
stable interest rates at the interest
rate that the Fed has set and that
everybody knows that and they can
predictably go into the market and be
able to borrow cash at a rate that's
close to the rate that the Fed wants to
have in the marketplace. a lot of recent
discussions about what's been going on
in the markets during some of these
recent corrections, people have been
wondering if the the there's just not
quite enough kind of liquidity and cash
slloshing around in the system to keep
everything ticking along. And so you've
seen people doing things like, you know,
deleveraging, right? Basically saying, I
just want to get my cash back. I want to
pull everything out. So you saw stocks
go down. You saw gold also go down,
crypto, bonds. How much of that do you
think has maybe been related to to
what's been going on with the Fed's
balance sheet that maybe we're at the
end of this quantitative tightening?
>> I mean, I think a lot of those things
also depend on the macroeconomic
outlook. And so that's that's more about
inflation and unemployment rates, but it
is true that if you start to worry that
the level of reserves is going to get
scarce in the Fed's words, then
borrowing costs start to spike and they
go much higher. So we actually saw this
in September of 2019. The Fed was at the
time, you know, going through this
quantitative tightening process,
reducing the size of its balance sheet.
And as it did that, reserves got too too
low. They got scarce. And as a result of
that, even on a overnight borrowing
basis, in some cases, that was nine or
10% and that was in a rate environment
where the rates were supposed to be
around two and a quarter percent. And so
that's what you start to worry about.
And that's that's really why the Fed is
at this moment in time where it's really
carefully thinking about are reserves at
the right level. Are they ample or maybe
are they approaching a level below
ample, which the Fed calls scarce? And
and so they have a bunch of tools to
manage that things like the standing
repo facility, but they also could start
to grow the size of their balance sheet
gradually through purchases if they
needed to. that 2019 episode maybe isn't
doesn't live in the public sort of
memory like you know the black Monday or
something like that but but in in
certain corners of the market that
September 2019 kind of repo rate spike
where those overnight rates spiked way
beyond what the Fed was kind of
targeting for its rates that was a big
episode right
>> yeah no it was definitely a big episode
I think for for central bankers around
the world and the Fed very clearly I
mean it's sort of seared in my memory
because that was the first experience
where the Fed is going through this
quantitative tightening process. And
really, you don't you don't know how
many how much liquidity the banking
system needs scientifically speaking. In
some cases, you can estimate it based on
well, we know that the grow gross size
of our economy is $30 trillion or we
know that the banking system is $25
trillion. So based on those things, how
much liquidity does the banking system
need on a day-to-day basis? You know,
today it's around $3 trillion of
liquidity of reserves in the system. At
the time in 2019, it was much lower. Um,
and that's that makes sense. I mean, the
economy's grown since 2019, so you'd
expect there to be more reserves in the
system today, but at the time, you know,
the Fed was going through this process
of reducing its balance sheet. And then
it, you know, you you can kind of
stumble on these moments when all of a
sudden borrowing pressures really
emerge. When that happens, it's not good
both for central banks because the job
of a central bank is to maintain control
over overnight interest rates, right?
that's kind of one of your primary jobs.
But it's also not good from the
perspective of everyday Americans from
corporations because when borrowing
costs spike, it builds uncertainty into
your interest rates. So if you're
thinking about affordability, if you're
thinking about your debt servicing costs
and you have a spike in overnight
interest rates, you start to build that
risk into your future estimations of
what you're going to have to pay. So
interest rates start to can start to go
up simply because you're experiencing
the risk of you're you're worried about
the risk of another spike in funding
costs.
>> So when you say affordability, do you
mean that like if the Fed doesn't have a
good if if the central bank doesn't have
a good handle on what's going on in
these this liquidity part of the market,
could it affect things like, you know,
housing affordability in the future?
Some of the main factors on those
interest rates are going to be the Fed's
assessment and the the real world um the
real world unemployment rate and the
growth rates. Right? So the Fed is
really targeting um inflation and
employment, right? And those are the
things that are going to really drive
what long-term interest rates are going
to be in the in the main. But around
that, if you expect that markets are not
going to function well or that you're
going to have high overnight borrowing
costs because there's not enough
liquidity in the system, well, that too
is going to get baked into your
long-term interest rates. You know,
whether that's a term premium or you
want to call that a risk premium. You
know, that's going to get built into
those interest rates and they're going
to be higher than they otherwise would
be if you had a stable functioning
Treasury funding repo market.
>> All right. So, what are some things that
you think the Fed will be saying and
doing about this stuff? Like what what
is the Fed debating? Because it seems
like obviously they want things to
function well, but but what what what
are the tricky parts for for doing that?
>> One of the things that the Fed put in
place after the 2019 experience was, you
know, it has these overnight repo
operations and in those operations,
basically the Fed is lending the market
cash, okay, and it's collateralized by
securities. So, it's a very safe form of
lending, but it injects liquidity into
the market on an overnight basis.
They've since in 2021 turned those repo
operations into a standing repo
facility. So, I'm sure many have heard
about the standing repo facility. It is
it is there literally every day and uh
primary dealers and banks can go to the
standing repo facility and they can get
cash from the Fed on an overnight basis.
And that facility is one of the main
tools that the Fed today is using to
guard against a spike in these overnight
borrowing rates. Some people have
questioned whether that facility is
operating as effectively as it could.
And there's probably some things that,
you know, it appears the Fed is looking
at to even tweak the way that that um
facility operates.
>> So in this quantitative tightening
process, right, the Fed has stopped
buying treasuries and mortgage bonds. Do
you think that they will need to, you
know, restart doing that? Is that
something that we should be looking for
communications from them about?
>> Yeah, definitely. At the next meeting, I
think you're going to see some decisions
about interest rates and then you're
going to see some balance sheet
communications is the is my best guess.
As anyone does who's active in financial
markets, you can purchase securities or
sell securities for a variety of
reasons. The Fed really has done it for
three reasons. One is that when markets
are dysfunctional, the Fed has gone out
and they've bought asset assets to in
order to restore functioning in markets.
So they did that in the global financial
crisis and then after the pandemic, but
then they do purchases for another
reason, which is that, you know, when
the Fed buys long-term assets, they
actually can lower long-term interest
rates. So that's for really a
macroeconomic purpose. And then the
third reason really is is a little bit
more benign and um it is mainly
operational which is that as the economy
grows, as the banking system grows, as
the amount of currency in circulation
grows, the Fed actually just needs to
level up its balance sheet, increase the
amount of assets that it has to offset
the growth in these other things so that
there's continues to be enough reserves
in the system.
>> What do you think will happen with
interest rates? Uh what do you think the
Fed might do at the next at the next
meeting? Yeah, I mean I think if you
take a look at some of the speeches that
have been coming out, it seems like
there's a lot of different views on the
FOMC, but it seems most likely that, you
know, if you look at market pricing,
maybe 80 90% probability that in
December they will lower interest rates
and then maybe a couple more times next
year. And I think that appears to be on
the back of sort of uh labor market
weakness. Okay. And I think the hope
that inflation is sort of going to
return to its long-term levels or its
targeted levels um maybe once some of
the um tariff price increases sort of
pass through. And so to what extent do
you think these two decisions would go
together? Like would the Fed if the Fed
decides to not cut if they decide to
hold rates where they are does that make
them more likely to do things like kind
of you know adjust its balance sheet?
Are they two totally separate decisions
made for like by different groups of
people? Like how how much do these
things interact?
>> I mean on one hand they're pretty
different decisions like one is based on
what is the current incoming data about
the economy about inflation about
unemployment and where should the level
of overnight interest rates be set to
help maintain those things at their sort
of Fedmandated level. Um and the second
choice is really about balance sheet
policy and you know do you have enough
liquidity in the system? But the two
things are linked because if you don't
have a functioning market, if there's
not enough liquidity in the banking
system and in financial markets, then
you can no longer implement your policy
successfully, your interest rate policy.
So you might want interest rates to be
at three and a half or three/4ers uh
percentage uh uh rate, but if there's
not enough liquidity in the system, then
they could be much higher than that or
they could be much lower than that.
>> What are things that the Fed is thinking
about or should we all be thinking
about? should investors be thinking
about when it comes to like how the
treasury markets are functioning because
that's part of what you're doing now,
right? How concerned should people be
about whether or not that market is
working well and will be there when
everyone needs it
>> at BNY? BNY does play a special role in
the US Treasury market. I mean, we have
about a third of the Treasury market in
in custody and we're a large custodian
and so we take that very seriously. The
Fed and the public sector obviously want
the Treasury market to operate
effectively as well because they
implement monetary policy. They finance
the government through it. So um you
know lots of vested interests um across
the capital markets in the US treasury
market.
>> You know the treasury market is supposed
to be safe and liquid. Those are like
its two fundamental characteristics and
that goes all the way back to the
forefather of the treasury market
Alexander Hamilton. Okay.
>> Also founded BNY. Um, but he basically
when he was first Treasury Secretary, he
laid out a plan to refinance the
Revolutionary War debt. And he said,
"These are going to be safe because
Treasury securities will be repaid on
their contractual terms. They're going
to be liquid because I don't care who
owns the government's debt. We're going
to pay that person." And so we think
about and I think about how can you make
the treasury market safe and liquid. And
you know, there are a lot of different
dimensions to that, but one of them is
things like central clearing because it
makes the the treasury market safer. It
means that you don't you're not exposed
to your counterparty credit risk.
>> Um, you can make the market more liquid
as well. And that's things like standing
repo facility for the public sector, but
in the private sector, you want to have
tools that basically allow you to take a
treasury security and convert it to
cash. That's the ultimate form of
liquidity, and that's what treasuries
are designed for. you know, we all want
to pay for things instantly, digitally.
Does this play a role in that? Like how
important is this market for like that
kind of liquidity, you know, the money
that just sort of moves around all day?
>> Yeah, it's very, very important to it.
And so, tying it back to our
conversation around reserves, right? So,
treasuries are prized because of their
safety and liquidity, but they're
considered a highquality liquid asset,
which means banks and investors around
the world have stores of treasury
securities so that they can convert them
to cash if they need to. And the reason
you'd convert them to cash is because
you have payment needs. You might have
to purchase securities. You might need
to uh make payment obligations on a
daily basis, on an overnight basis, and
in some cases on an intraday basis. I
mean, we saw with the failure of SVB,
very typical bank run, second largest.
>> That's the 2023 Silicon Valley bank.
>> Yes. Silicon Valley
>> regional bank crisis.
>> Yes. Yes. They failed. It was very
typical bank failure in one dimension,
but on the other hand, it was very
atypical in that it happened. so
quickly. And I think what that's telling
us is that you need to have that ability
to have liquidity to be able to convert
a treasury security or another
instrument to cash very quickly. And so
I think that that is the direction of
travel, right? Is more real time ability
to convert securities or other assets
into cash um at any time anywhere around
the world. When you're talking, it makes
me think about, you know, I think the
way a lot of people understand inflation
sometimes, you know, what you might
learn in school is it's too many dollars
chasing too few goods, right? And so the
price of things rise. How much of a role
does does what's going on in these
markets, in these funding and treasury
and cash markets play in in inflation?
Is that a big factor? It's possible for
the repo markets to uh be connected to
inflation if you if you had really large
amounts of lending that were happening
and that's being converted into spending
power. I mean I think it's possible for
that for the repo markets to contribute
to inflation but I tend to think of
inflation as more being related to the
growth in the economy and expectations
around wages because I think some people
do hear this and they think well that's
why I buy gold or bitcoin is because
everything you're describing I kind of I
want out. I don't want to worry about um
you know some decision being made at the
Federal Reserve and what it means for
the amount of money slloshing around. Do
you think that there's there's there's a
logic to that or or do you think that
that's a kind of misunderstanding of of
sort of what actually drives prices to
be higher over time?
>> I think that if the Fed is is operating
effectively then this is something that
people don't have to worry about because
there's enough liquidity in the banking
system that it operates effectively each
and every day. so that you're borrowing
or you're lending at the rates that are,
you know, the economy needs to grow and
to maintain stable inflation, stable
prices over time. And so this should
really be in the background. The reason
why it's in the foreground today is
because of the experience of having gone
gone through COVID having the Fed bought
so many assets, now it's bringing them
back down and you're at this inflection
point about what the level of liquidity
should be in the system. you know,
banks, corporations, pensions, um,
insurance companies, they're all active
in repo markets because you need to be
able to borrow and lend on an overnight
basis. That's very, you know, normal
activity within financial markets and
it's something that's actually one of
the best things about our US capital
markets is we have a large and stable
um, capital market system and the repo
markets are a big part of that. So what
you really want there is stability. You
want efficiency and you want enough
liquidity that the system operates
effectively. And if you've got that,
then it's a real a boon to the US
economy.
>> All right. Well, we're going to take a
quick break and when we come back, we've
got one last question for Nate Warfl at
BNY.
>> All right, Nate. So, there's a couple
things that we're going to hear from the
Fed at this upcoming meeting. What's
more important, their next decision
about interest rates, hold or cut, or
what they say about their balance sheet,
buying bonds, not buying bonds? What's
more important?
>> I'm going to I'm going to say both. Um I
think you know you obviously
options. Yeah, you got to you got to you
know markets are going to watch what the
Fed does in terms of its next decision,
but that's a that's just one decision on
interest rates. You know, I think what
it does with its balance sheet is
equally important because that has this
lasting effect on liquidity in the
banking system.
>> All right, Nate Warfl, head of market
structure at BNY, thanks for joining us.
>> My pleasure. Thanks for having me.
>> Sorry, I didn't bring a pen. That was an
oversight.
I've I've walked into like interviews
with like a notebook and notebook and I
have to be like, "Do you have a pen?"
>> Like I'm from the Wall Street Journal.
Do you have a pen?